And that will interrupt us every once in a while.
This is August the 2nd. We're in the MSC and I have
the honor and pleasure of chatting with Mrs.
Rachel Gonzalez about her memories of being a very
proud and loyal Aggie wife and mother. Say a
sentence or two and let's chat. Just to check this.
Yeah, I am a very proud Aggie mom and mother.
To begin with, please tell this machine to
acquaint someone who might hear this or read it
many years in the future. Describe your family
background, parents, where they grew up, Well, my
father came from Durango, Mexico. He was educated
in a Methodist school from pre-kinder all the way
up through college. He had a degree in public
accounting, and he came to Texas in 1915 when he was
run out of Mexico by Pancho Villa. He came to and got
acquainted with some people that knew Mr. Saurus
Lucas who had a big ranch and owned a lot of land,
owned the Berkley and had a mercantile. And my
father, who was an accountant, got a job as the bank
accountant and the manager of the Berclair
Mercantile. And that's where he met my mother, who
was living in Berclair. and her education was a
private done at home by tutors because there was no
public school in the motel and so my grandfather
had tutors from Goliad come in and I would say she
may have gone up to the eighth grade got an eighth
grade education and that's where he she met my
father they got married and We had a family of 14.
They lived next door to my grandfather and
grandmother.
What about your father's family? Where did they
come from? My father's family was from Durango,
Mexico. They stayed in Durango. Oh, so both your
mother and father? Were from Durango? No. Oh, I'm
sorry. My mother's all family were from Goliad.
Oh, I'm sorry. My grandmother was born inside the
mission, La Bahia Mission, and that's where she
was baptized and had her confirmation, was
married, and was buried from that mission. How
many generations had they lived there? Do you
know? Oh, well, I guess all their... by four or five
generations because uh my grandmother
originally the people all her people were from
goliad around lava hill so they may be older your
family may predate texas as a state that's on that
side of the thing on my mother's side of the family
grandmother's side of the family my father's
family and when he came to the united states they
remained in mexico My grandmother, my father's
mother, was a widow. Her husband had died in their
own minds, but She doesn't know how she signed
those mines over to a lawyer. And, of course, she
was well taken care of, and her children all were
educated. Like I said, they were educated in a
Methodist missionary school, because these
missionaries had come from England to Durango,
established that school, and that's where my
father got all his education. And during Pancho
Villa's time, he was an officer in the Mexican
army, so then Pancho Villa captured him. And my
grandmother, knowing Panchavilla's mother,
appealed to her. And then one of my father's
cousins, first cousin, joined Panchavilla's
army because he had four sisters, just like my
father had five sisters and he had four sisters.
And usually Panchavilla would come into a town and
take, and the soldiers would take advantage of the
women. And so that way, His cousin joined
Panchayat's army so that- To protect the sisters.
To protect the sisters and the cousins. But my dad
was captured by Pancho Villa because he was in the
Mexican Army. And so through this cousin and
through my grandmother's appeal to Pancho Villa,
he told them that he would not execute him, but he
had to get out of the country. And that's when my
daddy came to San Antonio, and eventually he wound
up as a bookkeeper and accountant for Mr. Cyrus
Lucas in Berclair. Do you have any idea why he came
to San Antonio instead of some other town? Well,
usually all those people that were being put out by
Pancho Villa usually would end up in San Antonio.
And he was sitting in the hotel lobby of the Blue
Bunny Hotel in San Antonio, and Mr. Lucas had room
there when he would go do business with the banks in
San Antonio. And the man that had driven him there
was his manager of one of the big ranches. And he got
to talking to my dad and asked my father, how do you
know English so well? And I told him and he said,
well, you know, he said, we're here, we're looking
for cowboys. And my dad said, well, I can, I know how
to ride a horse because he knew how to, says I can do
that. So that's when he told Mr. Lucas, well, I got
you a ranch hand, a cowboy, and took him to the
ranch. And then the man realized that my dad didn't
know how to cut cattle. But in talking to him, my dad
showed him all his credentials. So he said, you
know, Mr. Lucas is looking for a bookkeeper, and
I'm going to tell him about you. So he had an
interview with Mr. Lucas, and he hired him. And he
worked for him until 19...
Well, after Mr. Lucas died, he kept with his son,
Mr. Pryor Lucas, and then with his daughter, Mr.
Lucas's daughter. They too had big ranches, and he
had all those accounts and everything. So my dad
stayed with that family as an accountant until
1948. I think in 1945 he opened up his own
accounting business in Beeville. And of course he
kept the Lucas's accounts, but he got more
accounts like the drugstores in Beeville and
several businesses and of course income tax time
he... Now your parents met in... In Beauclair. In
Beauclair. And that's where they lived for a
while. We lived there until 1945. 1946 they moved
to Beeville. Did you start school in Beauclair? We
went to school, elementary school in Beauclair,
and I, we didn't have a high school, I mean, there
was a high school, but it was only for Anglos. And
the Mexican school was up to the seventh grade, and
also the black school. But there was no way we could
go to high school, but my father would, my two older
brothers, three older brothers would room and
board in Beeville, and they went to high school
there, and from there they came to A&M. But I didn't
know, my father didn't know what he was gonna do
with me, because he didn't want me to room and board
where I didn't know anybody. But Mrs. R.A. Hall,
whose husband was the superintendent of the
Experiment Station, A&M Experiment and BUL, was a
homemaking teacher and she had taught my brothers
and knew my family. So she said that she could keep
me at her house and I could go to school with her. And
I lived with her four years. I lived in their home
four years while going to school. Right now the,
forgive me for this naivete, in Beeville there was
only one high school? No. Oh, there was a separate?
Separate school. For Hispanic? For Hispanic, the
Westside High School, and that's where my
brothers graduated. It was in my sophomore year of
1940, 1938, 39.
that we were integrated into the high school. And I
graduated from A.C. Jones High School in 1941.
About how many in your senior class? Oh, I would say
there were about 80. And among your brothers and
sisters, you're number what? Number four. You're
number four. Or the 14. And growing up at home, did
you all speak English or Spanish? We spoke both
English and Spanish. And it was so funny because we
did the studying. The cooking was done in my
grandmother's house because she lived next door.
And we did the studying there. She had a great big
old piano, almost as big as this, this grand piano
that had this black big in the living room. And we
would get on top of that and we would study. She had a
table in the dining room and if our writing was not
done right or she thought it was messy or
something, she said, you made too many mistakes.
You have to do your work over again. We didn't
realize that she didn't know how to read English.
But just because of the writing and the messy
paper, we had to do over again. And she and my
grandfather were very instrumental in helping my
mother and father go to school. As you were growing
up, did you understand that girls were to be just as
educated as boys? Well, no, because a lot of my
cousins We were about the same age because my
grandmother had an adopted daughter and then she
had a daughter, my mother and another daughter.
And their children were kind of about the same age
as we were. But they, as soon as they got to the
seventh grade, they didn't pursue anyway. It was
through my father that... He said that we all had to
be educated. Well, that's what I was meaning. In
your family, with your parents, yes, you were
going to be. I mean, there was no, they said, well,
we're going to quit or we're going to stop or we're
not going to go to school. That never did enter our
mind because my father and mother were, and my
grandmother and grandfather were very
persistent that we went to school. And do you
remember which language you learned first?
Spanish. Spanish first. Spanish first. Because I
certainly don't detect an accent in your English.
Well, by the time we were going to school, we knew
English. And we could, you know, understand. All
right, so you graduate from high school in
Beeville. In Beeville. And when do you start
getting letters from this young man that's in the
Air Force? Well, I went on to college, San Antonio
College, and I got a teaching certificate because
he was doing the war, and they needed teachers, and
they needed a teacher there in my little hometown,
and my father said, Well, you need to get a teaching
certificate and come teach. We need somebody to
teach. I was teaching the first and second grade,
and then they went home at 3 o'clock, and then I
taught social studies to the seventh grade. This
is in Berkeley. In Berkeley. And then a job came
open at the Experiment Station for a secretary.
and he'd pay more. So I went to, because I was
helping with some of the family, because we had
some in high school, some in college. So I went to
work at the Experiment Station, and that's when I
got a letter from Ralph, which was like in 1944. I
think 44 or 43,
I believe. Because I went to the University of
Mexico that summer, and I remember writing
letters to all different, some of our hometown
boys that were in the service. And I know I was
writing to Richard Bazan, who was stationed with
Ralph. And I was writing to, well, about four or
five of the boys that were overseas that we knew,
the families knew each other. And so I was writing,
I wrote Ralph a letter and told him all about me, and
we just kept writing. And when I came home from the
University of Mexico, like I said, I was working at
the Experiment Station, and that was in 45. And I
kept on writing to Ralph and the other people.
Well, the girls that he, because he was writing to
five of the girls in BUL. So Charlotte Murray and I
kept writing to him, and we kept a race of who was
going to be the last one, I mean, the first one to
quit. So I don't know why Charlotte put a write-in
to him, but I kept on, you know, writing. Did you all
exchange pictures? Yes. Letters and pictures.
Letters and pictures. And so when war was over in,
well, I had visited with his mother before, during
1945, because he had been over there since 42. and
had not come home. And I remember the first time I
walked into her living room, the Christmas tree
was up and it was like in April. And she said, I've
been keeping that Christmas tree because Ralph's
been writing that he's been, will come home
Christmas. And he said in 44, he didn't come home.
And I'm hoping that this year he will come. Well,
then war with Germany was over and then the war with
Japan. And so he was coming home and he wrote and
said that he would like to meet me. So we didn't have
transportation, but the Greyhound, I mean, we had
a car, but we, I didn't, we just had only two cars. My
brother, oldest brother had a car and my father had
a car. So I rode the bus to San Antonio because I had
an aunt that lived there. And whenever we went to
San Antonio, we stayed at her home. So I wrote her
and told her that this young man was picking me up
and taking me to her house. recognized me right
away and of course let himself known and he took me
to my aunt's house then he took me to his house his
mother had prepared a meal and and no i think he took
me to a cafe yeah that's the second time we went to
sleep he took me to a cafe and we had dinner and i
think we went to him we went to a movie and then he
took me home to my aunt And then the next day he
picked me up and we went over to his house and that's
when we had a Sunday dinner at his house and he took
me back to my aunt and I picked up my things and my
suitcase and he took me to the bus station and I went
home. And then he came to visit my family and the
third time he came that's when he asked Oh. Now,
what did your family think at first about your
writing to these boys? Well, my dad knew that
because, you know, the mayor came to his office.
And he knew I was writing to all these boys because
it was, you know, the thing to do. Patriotic. Yeah.
But he didn't, I mean, there was nothing. We'd just
write about what was happening in the family. And,
of course, David, it was David Alanis, and he was
taken prisoner in Germany. And, you know, the
families just were close together. Is there
anything that you have teased him about since then
that he didn't tell you about in advance? Oh, I
don't know. what it be okay I don't I don't think I
think he told everything and then his mother would
great so now that's in the fall of 45 that's in
October I think we he came home in October 45 is he
discharged yes okay he's discharged and we got
married in December right and what did you at that
point what did you think he was going to do
professionally Well, he had worked for Milam
Chevrolet, and he had the job back. I mean, that was
the understanding when he went in the service that
Mr. Freeman would give him the job back. So he had a
job with Mr. Freeman in the parts department, and
we got married and went on our honeymoon, and when
we got back, he went to work. with Mr., at Milam
Chevrolet. And then in September, we got married
in December. September 29th, we had our son, and he
kept working at Milam, but then Smith Motor Sales
offered him a better job. So he went to work in the
parts department at Smith's as part salesman. And
we, that's when we bought our home. What part of San
Antonio? In Palm Heights, what was called Palm
Heights. Had you quit teaching? Yes. I was a
homemaker. I was staying home with my son. And so we
bought the home in 1946.
And we furnished it, and we were doing pretty good.
Better than a lot of them, because my husband had a
steady job. But then my two brothers had graduated
from A&M, and then Bert and Carlos were here. And so
he wanted to go on to school, Carlos talked him into
trying A&M, so we came up here to find out what he
needed and they told him he had to take the
chemistry and the math in the summertime. So that
summer we got busy and we decided what we were going
to sell, what furniture we were going to sell and
what to keep. Well, they let us know that we
couldn't have housing at A&M that year. So I was
telling my parents and they said, well, stay with
us the first year. So we sold, we decided what
furnish to sell and we sold the house and I think we
sold it with a stove and a refrigerator. And
stove, refrigerator and the couch and the living
room furniture. We kept the dining room table and
the chairs because that was kind of like an antique
that I had gotten. And we kept one bedroom, no, we
kept the bedroom furniture. And my brother in
Berkeley had a vacant room in his home, so we put our
bedroom furniture in there. And the dining table,
my mother kept it in her living room because it was a
drop-leaf table. She said, we can always use it
because we had a long table in the dining room, but
when we had more family, well, we could use it. So I
stayed with them a year and did substitute, and my
sister was teaching in Berclair. And so I did
substitute in there for her and then for some of the
other. There were three, it was a three-teacher
school. And then he was able to get, he stayed at
Bryan Air Force Base because it's freshman year.
All right, with that freshman year, when he came up
here to enroll, did he bring the car? Yes. So you
were without wheels. No, no. Yes, he brought the
car, yeah. That's right. And the baby was three
years old? he was three well he yeah Ralph came the
first of September and Robert was three on the 29th
okay uh and you're living with your my parents your
parents uh and uh so you were a stay-at-home mother
well I did have my father in his office oh oh okay
okay whenever he needed me uh he asked me would you
know and how often did your husband come home Well,
he tried to come home every weekend, but then every
other weekend. Then he sold
his car, and we were able to get another one. He came
home almost every other weekend. And of course,
holidays, we spent some time with his parents in
San Antonio and the rest with my parents. And then
somehow, some holidays, he would work. I mean,
Miss Morisette was real good about giving him two
weeks job, make extra money. And we were able to
make ends meet. And of course, my parents helped a
lot. Then, the end of his freshman year, he found
out that he had a place and they assigned us to Vet
Village. During that first year, do you remember
any emergencies where you had to locate him by
telephone? No. When
I was in high school, I had Dr. Lancaster, who was a
very young man doctor there. And so after I got
married, I kept going back to him. And of course,
when I got pregnant, he told me I had needed to find
somebody in San Antonio for that. But for checkups
and everything, Ralph and I would go to him. So when
we started school and I took Robert, our son, for
shots and things, he didn't charge me. And so he
said, just if you get sick, he gave us the name of a
doctor. His last name was Smith, Dr. Smith here.
And he says, go to him. But we didn't have any
emergencies that first. No, I was thinking about
while you were in San Antonio and he was up here. Oh,
no, in Beeville. I was in Beeville. Yeah, in
Beeville. Did you ever have to? No. Okay, because I
thought he didn't have a telephone in his room. And
do you remember what Christmas was like that first
year when he came home? What did you all do to
celebrate? Well, we were at my parents' home, and
we just did what we always have done because my
parents always had all the kids. And so we...
remember that my mother helped me with buying
things for Robert and my grandmother who was had
had a stroke when we just before we got married and
my mother kept her in a hospital bed in fact they
lived they built a bedroom and bathroom for her in
Beeville and she was
Robert was very dear to her because it was not the
first great grandchild, but she just fell. And so
we always celebrated Christmas with her. And in
that summer, before we came up here to Red Village,
that's when she passed away. And...
That was one of the saddest things because Robert
was so used to her. And it was the Fourth of July
weekend and we were going to spend it in Beeville.
Robert Ralph had gotten a job with Smith Motor
Sales in the parts for the summer. And we were going
to spend it in Beeville and she was waiting for him.
And finally she said, I just wish Robert would get,
they would get here. because she wanted to see him,
but she died. We were leaving San Antonio that
evening, but she died about 2 o'clock. I mean, she
just had another. All right. And during that year
when you were down there by yourself, I believe he
said he sent you money? Yes, out of his paycheck. So
what was your budget, your spending budget? Well,
he would send me, I think it was $60. A month? A
month. And I would give my mother, I insisted on
paying and my mother wouldn't think about it, but I
think I gave my mother $30. And I kept 30 and out of
that 30 we budgeted to buy, you know, clothes and if
we had to, of course the drugstore, Daddy had to
account for Joe and Joe was very good to us, the
pharmacist, because he was a friend and he would
always do discount on our medication or whatever
we needed. All right, and as you're getting ready
to move into Vet Village, Did y'all call it Vet,
what did y'all call it? Vet Village. You called it
Vet Village. Did you have any choice or did they
assign you to? No, they assigned you, we were
assigned a two-little bedroom and living area and
kitchen. Describe that apartment. Well, it was
just like this, maybe a little larger. It was just a
barracks that was divided in half, had a wall, and
it had two bedrooms in the back. Then he had a living
room in an open place where they had a little dining
table in the kitchen and a place for your washing
machine. It had deep sinks because you used your
washing machine there. It was a roll-type washing
machine, and you used the sinks to rinse the
clothes. We moved there. Of course, we had the
two-bedroom furniture that we moved. in we had the
washing machine and it was furnished with a stove
and refrigerator in the dining table and so uh we uh
they had a kind of like a day bed but it what it was it
was just a kind of like a cot with a wooden and it had a
mattress and i fixed it to where it looked like a
couch for the living room I think we had a rocking
chair that we brought from home and another little
living room chair. And we moved in. When they
assigned it, they wrote him and told him. So we came
up one weekend and cleaned it out. I mean, did
everything and put little curtains and got it all
fixed up. Then we moved the furniture before
school started. And when we got through finishing
and school started, then the neighbors, Helen,
Darren, and... D-A-R-R. D-A-R-I-E-N. I believe
we have it on there. Okay. And Lippincott. I can't
think of her first name. And Francis Cantrell.
They were already there. And Mary and Nance, they
were already there. And so they came in and
welcomed us home. And we would, in the evening, of
course school started in And we were getting the
kids up like feeding them breakfast and getting
them ready and they would go out and play and we'd
clean the little place and we'd straighten it out
and then in the evening we would sit outside on the
grass across and we'd talk about the family and the
kids would play and We did washing and of course
ironing. The washing, we were, every time we wore,
well we were assigned days to hang the clothes out
because I think four or five families used the same
clothesline. So there wasn't enough space for
everybody. No. So you had to ask them if you had
washing to do and you wanted to do it a certain day,
you would ask them to trade with you. So it was a lot
of fun doing that. And, of course, we joined the
First Baptist Church as soon as we got in and joined
WMU. And we attended Sunday school. And then Ralph
was an usher.